hi I'm Dr Eric Westman and this is the
ketoade simple podcast hi everyone Dr
Eric Westman here and welcome back U
sometimes it's my great pleasure to
interview people who whom I think are
movers and shakers in the the health
World these days and it's my great
pleasure to have Dr Thomas seed uh C
thank you for taking time to talk today
oh thank you very much Eric it's a real
pleasure to have this opportunity to
speak with
you imagine you're talking to a crowd
who they've never met you before they
have no idea who you are and although in
the low carb world that's quite unusual
there's still a few please um you know
who you are where you from uh and then
how did you get into this area that we
we know you for yeah well thank you uh
well right now I'm a professor of
biology at Boston College um I teach
graduate students I have uh an active
research lab with uh professional
scientists and technicians I teach
General biology to the non- majors um
and also cancer metabolism to the
advanced undergraduates in the biology
program so I I have a a a broad
background but you know over the many
years that I've been here at BC 39 years
now uh I I've I've taught
neurobiology uh
neurochemistry um and a variety of other
subjects um I worked for many years in
the field of epilepsy which started when
I was a uh a postto and then a faculty
member in the Department of Neurology at
Yale University in New Haven Connecticut
um so I I did a lot of work on epilepsy
mapped genes in in mice uh which would
hope to lead to uh better management
uh of epilepsy but um I did most of that
at Yale because everybody was interested
in that kind of stuff but when we came
up to BC one of my students said do you
you should do the ketogenic diet for
epilepsy it really works and I said no
when I was at Yale I tried to write an
internal Grant on ketogenic diet for
epilepsy and the animal models that I
had and they said oh no nobody cares
about ketogenic diets for epilepsy are
you kidding me I said that it's one of
the top top not non- toxical management
uh non-pharmacological management of
cancer that really works um interesting
seizures
yeah managing epilepsy um and to this
day uh we're really not sure about the
multiple mechanisms uh by which um
ketogenic diets work for managing uh
epilepsy of seizures recurrent seizures
it was started in 1921 by Wilder at at
the Mayo Clinic and um what we found
here at Boston College was that uh it
had a lot to do with the with the levels
of blood sugar um we could keep mice and
people managed in their uh seizures for
quite a while but even even a slight
elevation in blood sugar from from
whatever uh within a short period of
time would would trigger an epileptic
seizure so it it wasn't clear whether it
was the elevation of ketones or the
management of low sugar that was
responsible for maintaining uh a
non-epileptic or or a non-al let's put
it that way event in the brain and to
this day we're really not sure how all
this is stopping I mean there's a lot of
hypotheses but it's still not clear well
this makes sense to me a little more now
that you had that background with the
ketogenic diet and
epilepsy then applying that more to
cancer um have you kept up with the the
research on uh on seizures and there
seem to be a subset who have glute 4
deficiency right yeah in the brain but
generally every everyone gets a little
bit better or two-thirds get better if
you have seizures and you go on a keto
diet and still today it's um not well
known in the epilepsy world because
they're mostly drug focused right yes
that's beam in medical care today in
general but yeah but that's really it's
the puzzle is coming together a little
bit how did you pivot then to other
types
of yeah well we realized the work uh the
way the a ketogenic diet seemed to be
linked to blocking seizures was having
low blood sugar and elevated uh ketones
and and when we put mice that had
epilepsy on calorie restricted diets
where blood sugar would go down and
ketones would go up naturally without a
ketogenic diet we got the same
management of seizures so it was clearly
a ratio of glucose to ketones uh that
was blocking epileptic seizures but the
molecular mechanism by which that
happens in neural circuitry is still
debatable whether it's an increase in
inhibitory neurotransmitters a reduction
in excitatory neurotransmitters or the
or the signaling Pathways that are
involved is still uh Up Up For Debate
but when we were had a lot of
biochemistry on brain cancer at the same
time we were looking at at glycolipid
metabolism um in brain tumors uh I had
number of mice that were built uh with
brain tumors and we were always asking
whether the glycolipid patterns in Mouse
brain tumors were similar to that in
human brain tumors so I did some compar
comparisons and a lot of there were some
similarities but there were a lot of
differences and and the main problem was
it was hopelessly complicated whether
you had a human brain tumor or a mouse
brain tumor
uh it turns out that a lot of the blood
vessels have different glycolipid
patterns so the angiogenesis the blood
vessel the infiltrating immune cells all
had their own unique ganglioside
glycolipid patterns all mixed together
so it was very difficult to F it out who
was responsible for what but um it
turned out that I was looking at glyos
finger lipids and a company gave me a
drug uh we were working on Pac disease
uh which is a glyco lius thorage disease
and we were looking at at blockers of
ganglioside biosynthesis like everything
that comes into my lab I I always throw
it on an epileptic mouse or brain tumor
Mouse well if you have a hammer yeah
yeah yeah yeah that's absolutely right
does this drug if it doesn't works that
so so I put it on the epilepsy mice uh
this ganglioside inhibitor and oh the
seizures became reduced I said wow this
is really exciting so the drug company
decided to give me a lot more money and
not only that I put it on brain cancer M
with brain tumors and they got very
excited because it was shrinking the
brain tumors and I said wow what is
going on with this drug this is really
an unbelievable drug it blocks epileptic
seizures in mice that have genetic
epilepsy and it shrinks gleo blastoma
models in the mouse so I said whoa so
the company gave me a substantial amount
of money to figure out what the
mechanism was by which this drug uh was
working and you know it was interesting
when we fed the drug either to the mice
with epilepsy or to the mice with the
brain cancer their body weights went
down uh as if they were calorie
restricted and the the epilepsy or the
brain cancer the tumors stopped growing
or or grew very very slowly the seizures
gradually dissipated but the animals
lost body weight and I was say what's
going on with that it uh it was acting
like a calorie restriction because when
you calorie
restrict mice with brain tumors also the
tumor went down shrunk so I decided to
put in a body weight control on this
drug so I I would just feed the animals
less food to match exactly the body
weight of the drug and sure enough uh it
was equally powerful in stopping
seizures or shrinking the brain tumor so
I said what what is this drug doing and
it turns out the drug blocked um sucres
in the gut so the animals ate the food
uh but they couldn't digest it to get
the carbohydrate out of the food so the
drug was causing an indirect calorie
restriction and that's the reason why it
works so well so when I turned told the
company that this drug was working
indirectly through calorie restriction
immediately all my support and funding
uh disappeared
complain sometimes you don't want you
don't want to be quite so honest
yeah oh they dropped it like a hot
potato they didn't want I I I but the
drug actually worked on gangli side
we're shrinking that and that's what
made them think that it was working but
it wasn't the gangli sides we show we
rule that out
uh it was the calorie restriction that
lowered the blood sugar and then I
started to think about how does this
work and then I found out of warberg
work from years and years ago the the
great German scientist and he was saying
how did how did you find how did we have
a few I hope play you have a few minutes
to unpacked it how did you kind of
ReDiscover the auto the vorberg vorberg
effect well because uh Linda nebling at
Case Western got her PhD there in
nursing and she was giv little kids uh
ketogenic diets that were hopeless cases
uh they were both they were poison and
IR radiated and surgically mutilated and
and and and these little kids with
high-grade gomas were given up and as a
nursing student she said well we got
nothing to lose uh why don't we give
them ketogenic diets so that immediately
brought us because we knew about
ketogenic diets and epilepsy and we knew
that the ketogenic diet worked because
it was lowering glucose and elevating
ketones and she said uh that she got
dramatic results on these little kids
that had great Goma with ketogenic diet
so and then yeah then she said it uh uh
she said this might have something to do
with what OT warberg said so I said well
I heard of OT warberg everybody's heard
of this guy what the hell did he do so I
went back and started to unpack all the
work that he had done and I said man
this guy this guy had it right so then I
from that point on from about the year
2000 uh up until present so more than 25
years I guess 25 years actually 19 late
90s uh we started uh to look deeper into
this cancer thing uh looking at the
metabolism um well so before before we
get there I'm the the uh analogy is is
very interesting because I kind of
rediscovered the treatment of diabetes
and obesity from 100 years ago and it
was a low carb diet what what did uto
warber actually do and what did what did
he learn in um but I know it's more
complicated than that but uh did so so
you went back and read the the Articles
and yeah so I I said well warberg
clearly said back in in um and then from
his work in the
1930s uh goes back to actually the late
middle 20s I guess 1920s all the way up
to um the 60s that cancer was a a
metabolic disorder and uh all cancer had
um chronic damage uh to oxidative
phosphorilation the ability to produce
ATP through with oxygen and um as a
result to get disregulated growth they
had to compensate by switching to uh
energy uh that involved no oxygen like
fermentation energy without oxygen is
fermentation and he said um in order to
get cancer you have to have chronic
damage to the ability of the organel the
mitochondria to produce energy through
oxygen but it has to be compensated by
that s that cell's same ability to
upregulate a fermentation metabolism so
therefore there's two steps to get
cancer number one chronic damage to
oxidative phosphorilation and step two a
compensatory substrate level
phosphorilation or what we call
fermentation and he he clearly showed
that all major cancers had a reduction
in oxygen consumption uh and an
excessive production of lactic acid
which is the uh end product of the
glycolysis pathway the em and myov parns
pathway so and he said this was uh the
characteristic of all cancers um and uh
I read the papers very very carefully in
light of what I'm seeing for the first
time in my own research and I'm saying
this guy this guy was right uh but he
wasn't completely right and I didn't
realize at the beginning where he made
uh some mistakes and why his critics uh
misinterpreted a lot of what of what he
said and continue to this day as you and
I are speaking continue to Mis
misunderstand uh What warberg uh did and
the mistakes that warberg made in those
days oxygen consumption was considered a
direct linkage to Ox uh to ATP uh
production through oxidative
phosphorilation so warberg made this
connection based on Hans krebs's work of
the kreb cycle that each mole of oxygen
breathed produce seven moles of ATP
which is the energy from oxidative
phosphorilation so he showed that all
these cancer cells uh were breathing
less they were producing they were
consuming less oxygen and then they were
all producing excessive amounts of
lactic acid which everybody knows that
if you hold your breath or have a heart
attack or whatever lactic acid builds up
in your bloodstream even sometimes with
epileptic seizures when the patient
stops breathing during the seizure
lactic acid explodes in the in the in
the bloodstream because your tissues are
now deprived of oxygen and in order to
uh uh prevent themselves from dying you
immediately upregulate a powerful
fermentation metabolism which is energy
without oxygen but you the waste product
the end product is lactic acid so you
see lactic acid build up and what
warberg said is all cancers have a
deficiency of ox of oxygen consumption
and a buildup of lactic acid and that's
because they have a chronic damage to
oxos which is compensated for by alactic
acid he showed that even in 100% oxygen
all tumor cells contined to throw out
lactic acid and that could only happen
if there was a chronic damage in their
mitochondria and the ability to
oxidative phosphorilation now well that
was logical and all cancers seem to have
this and they referred to it now as the
warberg effect and everybody seems to be
comfortable with that although they most
people misinterpreted what it means uh
but so I looked at that and I looked at
all these different kinds of things um
and what I found I I did things well his
attackers his the people who didn't
agree with him uh said that oh there are
some cancer cells which have completely
normal oxygen consumption and therefore
W and and warberg must be wrong and the
reason why they continue to produce so
much lactic acid is because they have a
defect in lactic acid in glycolysis not
a defect in oxidative phosphorilation
and this argument is still today they
don't they many people refuse to believe
that warberg was correct so what I did
and my colleagues here as we carefully
examine oxygen consumption is it an
accurate marker for ATP synthesis
through um uh oxidative phosphorilation
is there a direct relationship and the
answer is only in normal cells and
tissues is that a direct relationship
and and not in cancer and this is where
warberg and all of his critics made this
big mistake they assumed that the oxygen
consumption in a cancer cell was
producing ATP as efficiently as oxygen
consumption in a normal cell we and
others have shown that the oxygen is
consumed in cancer cells but not used
entirely for ATP production so it's a
fults you're using it what what else
does it do what is that they use they
produce reactive oxygen species r
o so that a lot of the cancer cells take
in oxygen and they use it for the
production of reactive oxygen species
and a variety of other uh uh activities
independent of uh ATP production through
oxidative phosphorilation so you can't
use in a cancer cell you cannot use
oxygen consumption as a reliable
substitute for oxidative phosphorilation
as a reliable surrogate this is the new
stuff that we're presenting now as we
speak in some of our new writings which
then throws the whole uh cancer field in
a in a Tiff because now everybody was
using oxygen consumption uh and saying
oxos is normal in cancer cells warberg
was wrong warberg was uh right that o
that mitochondria defective his his
quantification using oxygen consumption
was not correct and to this day it's not
correct with most of the people that say
warberg was wrong so we cleared that up
and then we also found out that the
mitochondria in cancer cells produce ATP
through a fermentation metab amino acid
f fermentation so the mitochondria and
cancer cells can ferment nobody knew
this we have new evidence now that glute
everybody knew glutamine was used by
tumor cells in huge amounts but they
never knew that it was fermented uh we
have now direct evidence that glutamine
is a is a fermentable amino acid so when
you look at a tumor cell you say see
it's consuming oxygen and it's making
ATP making it look like it's normal but
the oxygen consumption is used for
reactive oxygen species and the ATP is
coming from a glutamine fermentation
metabolism this throws the whole field
into a into a now they're going to come
to know this and they're going to come
to know real soon because OT warberg was
not incorrect he just did not have all
the parts of the puzzle like we now have
it so therefore cancer can grow without
oxygen uh because it ferments and it
ferments glucose and glutamine the amino
acid so we now we put this together and
now we know how to manage cancer we know
how to prevent it well thank guess would
I um remember the telephone game where
you would say something and someone
would say to the other and then by the
well by the end of all this it got what
got to me the warber effect you know
cancer like sugar cancer like sugar and
that isn't the whole story by any means
but um how to what degree
now U is is that true that uh that uh so
you you learned that a keto diet was
something that children with epilepsy
could have it kind of probably made you
more comfortable with a whole concept of
not feeding animals and and humans carbs
right they uh and then the idea that
blocking the the sugar absorption with a
drug uh started having these effects
even even on a brain tumor the Goma
brain tumor model um the how that and
did this alter or or shift the science
that you wanted to create and generate
yeah well that that's an excellent uh
Point um which is still not understood
uh by the majority of oncologists and is
NE is refused to be accepted by the
cancer industry itself uh that um these
tumor cells can't survive without
fermentation and the two fuels that
ferment are glucose the sugar and the
amino acid glutamine and when they say
oh cancer cells can switch to other
amino acids no they can't we tested them
they're none of them are as effective as
glutamine oh they can go to fatty acids
and no they can't uh and and I threw it
out I said challenge you show me any
tumor cell that can live in the absence
of glucose and glutamine on fatty acids
and can survive and and and and and and
not just for an hour let's let's show me
several days this this tumor cell
because Normal cells can do this normal
cells don't need glucose and glutamine
they can survive on on resp on other
fuels they can survive on Ketone bodies
and certain things like this so um so
and nobody can show that so we know
cancer cells are absolutely dependent on
two fermentable fuels for survival very
clear although it's not accepted because
they think that some gene mutation is
involved and we showed that all those
gene mutations are Downstream
epiphenomena they're not the cause
they're the effects of the abnormal
energy metabolism but but let me get
right to the core once you understand
just like the epilepsy you can manage
Caesars if you lower glucose and Elevate
ketones um when you lower your blood
sugar uh whether it's through water only
fasting through ketogenic diets uh or um
low carb diets or however you want to
speak about it um and we built the
glucose Ketone index calculator uh which
calculates the ratio of glucose to
ketones in the blood and when you have
low gki values the tumors start to get
hammered big time um they can't they
cannot adapt they're locked into a
fermentation metabolism dependent on two
fuels and then people say to me well
you'll never get glucose uh to be as low
as you need to kill the tumor so oh yes
you can absolutely and you if you
remember Eric the study by drenic where
he took the obese people he published
the paper uh TW I I think it was several
very obese men and he fasted them for 21
days um uh just water only for 21 days
and then injected them with insulin
uh and brought the brought the blood the
blood sugar was down to um 0.5
Mill or a a a 9 milligrams per deal I
mean you as a physician would be most
normal people would be dead uh yeah
these guys were perfectly cognitive uh
they had we we don't recommend doing
that at home no no they don't we don't
recommend doing it but the but the but
the study showed that there was no
adverse effects from yeah and and they
tributed because the Ketone bodies were
replacing glucose for the brain keto
adaptation yeah yes keto adaptation
allowed these guys to be resistance to
very very low glucose levels so
you if you're running your running your
body on ketones the glucose level
doesn't have to be so high and so
so the the puzzle today still is how to
not allow glutamine to be around yeah
yeah so that's why we develop with my
physician colleagues the uh press pulse
therapeutic strategy um which which has
its linkage to
paleobiology um what I do in my research
is I look deeply into evolutionary
biology and concepts of of of science
and paleobiologists were trying to
figure out what caused great extinctions
of organisms on the planet uh over over
the history of our Earth uh as a planet
and uh these massive extinctions seem to
happen when two unlikely events happened
together a chronic stress on large
numbers of organisms uh on the planet
killing off the weak ones but many of
the strong ones were surviving then some
sort of impact from from a a comet or an
explosion of volcanoes all over the
Earth uh was the pulse so The Chronic uh
environmental stress together with some
uh puls caused um complete
exterminations of almost all organisms
so I I developed that concept for
managing cancer I said if we can lower
the blood sugar and put tremendous
stress uh uh on the cancer cells but a
few of them that are surviving on the
low glutamine then we come in with a
drug that just pulses the glutamine uh
uh short pulses which wipes out large
numbers of cancer cells because we also
know based on our research and the
research of others that uh our immune
system needs glutamine to function our
gut needs glutamine to function our Ura
cycle needs glutamine to function
appropriately so if we stress too much
on the glutamine we cause harm to the
body but if we come in short with
pulsing while we're keeping the choke
hold on the glucose with the
the diet can press the glucose down
massively so we come in with short
pulses to Target the the glutamine
keeping the gut healthy and the immune
system healthy we can then the our
normal healthy immune system uh gets
paralyzed but not killed by glutamine
targeting so what happens is when we
pull off the glutamine targeting our
immune system comes in and picks up the
dead Co cancer cells um and and then
gets rid of them and then we we come
back and we pelts it again so it's a
press pulse concept that gradually
degrades the tumor while allowing the
body to the normal functions of the body
to work uh without paralyzing the normal
functions of the body to eliminate and
and uh the tumor it's a beauty you have
to know a human systems physiology
biochemistry evolutionary biology and
genetics you put all that together and
you can come up with a nice non-toxic
therapy for managing cancer doesn't
require all these toxic drugs hunting
for genes which are all Downstream epip
phenomena so once you understand the
biology of the problem uh you can then
design nontoxic therapeutic strategies
and those folks that do it and
understand how to how it works you can't
believe the the therapeutic efficacy of
these of these people Cancers get go
into remission they go so I'm not saying
we cure cancer but we certainly can get
manage it for long periods of time
without toxicity and maybe there are
some resolutions let me just see if I
have the so you use the some kind of
diet to get the glucose low and then how
how do you what's the pulse again do you
take away glutamine yeah no okay so
glutamine is a non-essential amino acid
it's made from glucose so if I'm
lowering glucose I'm also not producing
as much glutamine by by lowering the
glucose but it's but but that's that but
we also know it's extremely important
for physiology so I come in with
glutamine targeting drug drugs okay okay
yeah and and and these drugs like 6D oxy
Oxon norleucine Dawn which was not
available to people it's a very powerful
it should be when they have all these
crazy drugs out there that cause your
hair to fall out your gums to bleed
diarrhea nausea they say these are the
drugs they they say will will you should
take but the very drug that works the
best is not available for you to take
can you believe this yeah has that has
that change is that changed I remember
talking to you a few years ago yeah one
of my patients is are they still not
available no they're not available U
which is crazy why the Food and Drug
Administration allows all these toxic
poisons uh to be allowed in the to treat
canser patient
and yeah but I don't know if I know that
but I don't think the the Food and Drug
Administration are getting paid off by
the pharmaceutical industry are they
maybe they I don't know no no but it it
takes a lot of money to get generate the
studies that are that would be needed I
think yeah
already done we've already done the
studies and and the studies were done
don't forget Dawn was used in little
kids with um leukemias and Don was used
uh in the past uh and it had some had
some therapeutic benefit but not for
everybody they didn't Target the glucose
when they were using the dawn it's not
going to work it's not going to work the
way it should work again well I wonder
so what would you need uh a lot of
people will watch this who have other um
other day jobs that might be helpful
like so what so there's a drug that's
available uh you can purchase it from
from a drug company but it's not
approved for human use yes yes not
approved for so you get in some hot
water because you're not an MD right or
oh
yeah Eric if I had cancer uh I would buy
it from the chemical company uh and use
it uh because I se I've seen how how it
works uh well so I remember uh some
years ago I worked with the inventor of
the nicotine patch yeah and and I uh was
asked to to get drugs for which then
would be uh prepared by our University
Pharmacy for the human use they you know
they make sure there's no mold and and
all and so under some sort of
investigational um uh drug research this
could be done and changed into human use
but but I I would like um it would be
wonderful if uh if young
oncologists watching this uh who want to
try a treatment that you've done now and
tell me the how many years or how many
uh models of cancer you've used this
press pulse therapy at well we I
actually we did it uh in mice first but
now when humans tried they do much
better than the mice uh we we our basil
metabolic rate is seven times slower
than that of the mouse so our our bodies
can deal with this so much and then you
and then you have a a physician who's
actually looking at the patient and and
moves the patient as to how you feel
today the mouse can't tell us that so um
right so we're we're the success of
metabolic ketogenic metabolic therapy
for humans is so much more powerful
uh than it is in the mouse cuz we we we
look at the mouse and know obviously if
he's breathing heavy he's not moving his
hair looks kind of disheveled we know
he's not feeling so well um and we try
to move him away from those States but
we can't ask it we can only know by the
way he eats and the way he moves around
that he's okay so so you are working
with uh any any any research setting or
with doctors who are using this with
people yeah well no no one's Using Dawn
I there might be a few people actually
who the wealthy people can get whatever
whatever they want um you know if you
have a lot of money you just go out buy
it you pay a physician give it to me and
here's the dosage because it's already
been published in the scientific
literature so um you know it's been used
on people and and evidence is there how
how much should I use when should I use
it it's all been there
uh I was still like some uh young
oncologist or or old a lot of times
there are people at the end of their
careers who haven't fixed anything and
they they say oh well we'll light out
one of our post dos look at a keto diet
yeah but in that do now there's a whole
neurod degenerative field based
on what what seems to me that that those
uh Jean uh Jean roow and and uh Adrien
Sheek yeah seemed like they they were at
the end of they ah well let just let
those post dos do what they want and now
they're they're stuck on this oh yeah
well it works but the the the thing of
it is is you've got to know the tools
that you have and how to use them and I
find that the oncology like for example
in tra medical training uh no one speaks
about metabolic therapy as the future
for managing cancer um yeah they're all
indoctrinated to think cancer is a
genetic disease uh and they're going to
find these drugs that Target your Al
mutation your egfr receptor or these
crazy things that are all Downstream
epip phenomena uh I published a major
paper uh showing that cancer is a
mitochondrial metabolic disorder not a
genetic disorder tell me tell me about
this study it was brilliant tell me
about this well it was it was several
studies um that I put all the stuff
together uh and I said it's you have to
be cognitively challenged to think that
cancer is a genetic disease either that
or you have to be a hopeless ideologue
uh anybody that would have a few
functional brain cells and would read
the papers would have to realize cancer
is not a genetic disease so what I did
was I found I went through a lot of
different things and where did this idea
come from in the first place that cancer
was a genetic disease it came from
Theodore boy in in 1914 who studied sea
urchins and he had a hunch uh that
cancer might involve some chromosomal
abnormalities but he said I'm probably
completely wrong I'm an interloper I
don't know anything about cancer and yet
the feeli brings him as the as the
Founding Father of the gene Theory um
but but um what I what I found is that
if you look at some of the papers uh
like um Sir Michael Stratton who who is
uh very well known in the field of
cancer genetics he found several breast
cancers um that had no
mutations uh and uh how how can you say
in the sematic mutation theory that
cancer is a genetic disease if I find
cancer cells that have no mutations how
do you explain that how can you say that
and what do you what why find is
happening and also Parsons with gleo
blastoma found a patient that had none
of the mutations no mutations in what
they predicted so well how do they do it
guess what they do they ignore it they
don't say anything about it they they
absolutely ignore it I said what do you
mean you got it you have EV direct
evidence you're saying cancer can these
cancers are not due to mutations and yet
you're saying cancer is a genetic
disease how could could you say
something like that and the National
Cancer Institute says right on their on
their homepage there cancer is a genetic
disease consisting of 100 different
diseases all different genetic mutations
nothing could be further from the truth
don't these people at the NCI read the
scientific literature so let me go on
what so Eric how did you convince
yourself how did you convince yourself
that it's not go then I well I'm going
through the the the list and now we find
that uh oh not all mutation
not all mutations are bad only the
driver the driver mutations are the ones
that cause disregulated cell growth now
we're finding new papers coming out that
um show driver mutations in our normal
tissues that never become cancer so that
throws cold water all of those are
suggestions that maybe cancer is not a
genetic disease but when when you go
back and look at the nuclear
mitochondria transfer experiments that's
the that's the nail in the coffin where
science s took um Israel and schaer from
Vermont took the nucleus of a tumor cell
and put it in the cytoplasm of a normal
cell and they got complete regulated
growth despite the continued mutations
in the nucleus and when they did the
Reversed experiment where they took uh
the the nucleus uh of a normal cell and
put it in the cytoplasm of a tumor cell
they got disregulated cell growth and
cancer um and this was done in frogs in
mice and by that was done in Vivo in
vitro repeated over and over again by
some of the best developmental
biologists in the field none of them
were testing warberg Theory they were
just asking how far a cancer nucleus
could drive normal development and in
each case it drove it to a certain
extent level and then the whole system
aborted uh because the mutations in the
nucleus were aborting development but at
no time did those mutations lead to
disregulated cell growth which is the
definition of what cancer is so when you
you look at the transfer experiments and
all these others you have to be
cognitively challenged to think that
cancer is a genetic disease well so the
the non-scientist list say the to the
genetic material is in the nucleus yeah
yeah right so so if you're G to argue
that the cancer is entirely genetic and
you're changing the nucleus which has
the genetic material to other cells this
really does throw a wet blanket on that
and then uh then if you change the
mitochondria from cell to cell yeah you
can shut down so it's very interesting
all these enogen and tumor these things
that people think are important uh when
you put new mitochondria into the
cytoplasm they all turn off uh because
you don't need to ferment anymore
because the reason those uh ancoin are
facilitators of fermentation metabolism
they so when a cancer cell becomes
disregulated it has to have all of this
glucose and glutamine come pouring into
the cell to replace oxidative
phosphorilation oxphos so you have to
open the floodgates to get in a poorly
used fuel because you're wasting so much
of it is waste product so they are
driven by ancoin but if you put a new
mitochondria in there with a it's like
putting a new engine in the in the in
the car wom you know everything's
working again you turn off the an anle
jees are all turned off so it's very
clear what's what's going on here so so
the something you said earlier if you
could just explain so that the genetic
mutation is an epip
phenomenon explain that to to the
general public okay so um no when you
look at cancer yes they're full of
mutations all cancer cells have loaded
with and now over millions now this is
the big genome projects have identified
millions of mutations right where do all
these millions of mutations come from in
these cancer cells and they come from
radiation well yeah well well uh
radiation can do that uh uh chemical
carcinogens can do that but but how do
chemical carcinogens cause mutations in
the nucleus uh they base their studies
on salmonella which is a bacteria so you
put chemical carcinogen uh on the
bacteria uh and you get mutations but in
humans the the chemical carcinine goes
into the mitochondria and the oxygen
that we breathe uh uh for oxygen
radicals called Ross rea active oxygen
species R this is the super oxide anion
and the hyperox oxygen molecule they
damage DNA proteins and lipids so the
mutations that we see in the nucleus are
Downstream effects of the the of the
mutagenic Pro process of the
mitochondria so bad uh uh mitochondria
that don't function properly produce r
that are carcinogenic and mutagenic as a
secondary effect of the damaged
oxidative phosphorilation so our nucleus
collects all these mutations and the
almost almost the entire cancer field is
focused on all these mutations that are
all Downstream epip phenomena so that's
why you have katuda opdivo and you have
all these immunotherapies that you hear
because they're trying to allow the mut
the immune system to to to function
despite all these different kinds of
mutations so most of the therapies now
here's the situation the immunotherapies
CTI immunotherapy opo L1 pd1 Inhibitors
and all these things you hear about
advertised on TV at night how you going
to do so wonderful they're all based on
the sematic mutation the gene theory of
cancer if the gene theory of cancer is
not correct you're not going to make any
major drop listen Eric we have almost
1,700 people a day in this country dying
from cancer which comes to about 70
people an hour and it gets worse and
worse and worse every year and every
year we hear new drug uh new therapy new
therapy all based on the sematic
mutation Theory so if the sematic
mutation theory is not the correct
Theory you're not going to get optimal
outcome anymore than the geocentric
theory could explain the movements of
the planets Cernic's came along with
Kepler and Galileo and said no the Earth
Earth moves and it circles the Sun and
once that happened everybody oh yeah you
know but for 18800 years people thought
the Earth was immovable and the sun
revolved around the earth um right now
we're uh the whole the cancer industry
thinks that the nuclear gene mutations
are the drivers of the disregulated cell
growth no no no no they're they're the
effects they're not the drivers they're
the effects so how if we could only
transplant the mitochondria in every
cell in in the cancer tumor or or or or
do you fix the
mitochondria cut the sugar
down is there any way to fix that
mitochondria well that's the future I
have been approached by entrepreneurs of
these guys that say the future of cancer
is mitochondrial transplantation but
that's not going to be in my lifetime so
uh I'm not going to be around long
enough to do mitochondrial TR but yes uh
that would in fact in in culture that
was shown if you can put new
mitochondria in the cells you can bring
them back to growth regulation uh I'm
I'm alive long enough to let's kill the
tumor cells without toxic it so that we
can also let people live longer uh right
now we know they can't live without
fermentation and they can't burn ketones
or fatty acids I published a big paper
showing all the cancer cells accumulate
fatty acids in the cytoplasm uh it's
because they can't use them and they and
if they try to burn them they get
reactive oxygen species and kill
themselves it's like it's like a
protection yet most of the people in the
cancer field think that those fatty
acids are there to drive the
disregulated cell growth these people
have no clue they don't read the
scientific literature do they nor do
they understand evolutionary biology the
fatty acids cannot be used as tumor cell
for tumor Cell Energy nor can Ketone
bodies they're driven by fermentation
fatty acids and ketones are
non-fermentable fuels cancer cells
thrive on fermentable fuels what are
they the sugar glucose and the amino
acid glutamine yes we looked at other
amino acids we interrogated them all yes
the sparine can do a little bit
glutamate can do a little bit but not
like glutamine glutamine is the big dog
in the amino acids that can be ferment
fermented so you ferment you have
glucose fermentation and you have
glutamine fermentation and they can't
use fatty acids and Ketone bodies so the
solution to the cancer problem is quite
simple lower the blood sugar Elevate the
ketones and then you come in with
pulsing of the glutamine pathway and you
should be able to manage these cancers
quite effectively without toxicity and
this is why we're seeing these parasite
medications they attack the same U
metabolic pathway that the tumor cell is
dependent on and they're very non-toxic
and they work together with the whole
transition of the body away from sugars
away from carbohydrates and elevating
ketones so this is a planned attack on
cancer uh that will be strategic based
on evolutionary biology and it's
non-toxic so the question you'd ask well
how come how come all the big Cancer
Centers don't know about this uh the
answer is I don't think they want to
know about it well and they're also
indoctrinated to think it's a genetic
disease so how you going to G to move
the feet you're not going to move the
needle
yeah although there are some doctors who
will be frustrated in the lack of
success although the in my experience I
didn't want to go into
oncology because I I wanted most of the
time to
win you know so there's a the selection
bias of the the personality of someone
who goes into oncology and but then the
other phenomena that I noticed is that
if you're a researcher and you just get
fun to study exercise because that's
what you're interested in exerise you'll
never study diet right and so when
Coca-Cola was funding an exercise
researcher he didn't care that it came
from Coca-Cola when what Coca-Cola was
doing was keeping other people away from
him the researcher right to make him
focus on something other than cocacola
so the the um chemotherapy industry is
going to keep the these vouchers busy
you or radiation and chemo the
traditional tools um and if they fixed
you know 50% of people for a certain
period of time I
I some it seems some areas of oncology
there's been some victories you know but
there's a lot of change going on um I
had a patient come to my office uh with
a cancer aggressive cancer and I I you
know I'm not known for he treating
cancer it's more obesity and diabetes
but he learned about keto and cancer and
and uh had read your book and went to
some other universities um and I thought
well I'll just go to Pub met I'll just
see I typed in the you know invasive
thyroid carcinoma and then keto and
there was a paper that popped up from
Matthew NZ EHS at Harvard who was a Sur
who has an animal model he came to this
because his wife went to a keto meeting
maybe you heard you speak and then told
you know through pillow talk that his
husband started studying this and and um
it turned out that it had some benefit
reduced tumor growth in the animal model
so I'm hopeful that there will be people
who uh will study this and and I just
have to say you know the criticism one
of the criticisms I got 25 years ago was
studying a diet that was unusual and and
ostracized was that a doctor Dr Atkins
funded me that first study and then and
I say through the years the Hallmark of
science is replication and and so in
your world is there another Center or
investigator that has
replicated what you've done that's
important yeah I think I think the
replications come uh
here and there um uh Maggie and Brad
Jones were were doing the big
documentary on the cancer Revolution uh
showing that it's actually a
mitochondrial metabolic disorder uh are
are Cate categorized or um putting uh
these folks um into a group uh all
telling their story uh of how they use
metabolic therapy to manage their
so-called terminal stage four cancers um
and uh uh we're we're uh we're
collecting a group of these folks and
everyone that I get cuz I I get a number
of uh people emailing me who who I I
send them my my information a kit of
information and they use it and then you
don't hear from them and then all of a
sudden a year or two three years later
they come back and they say I'm still
alive um and um the doctors are always
miffed they always they have no they
have no clue what happened and a lot of
them don't even ask what did you do um
they just said whatever you did just
keep doing it they they don't even like
want to know what what that what the
person did is anyone helping you
assemble these stories in a different
year yeah I have I'm collect I have a
registry now uh of folks and then I I
share them with Maggie and Brad Jones so
Maggie and Brad uh then uh put these
people into their documentary and you
they have a pain now used to start off
with a few of these people um and they
would said oh there's a they flukes you
know they they just by the grace of God
something happened their tumor
disappeared um then all of a sudden you
get more of them and then more of them
and and more and more of
them start there it's starting to be a a
you know a stampede of flukes um you
know so where the hell are all these why
are these stage four uh terminal cancer
patients still alive years after they
were told that they put their order put
their life together and get ready for
the for the end um and I find uh that
when we get these people and they start
the metabolic therapy right after their
diagnosis and they themselves are major
participants in in their man in the
management of their disorder their
condition they are the ones that do the
best they are the ones that uh do the
best you you the ones that feel I don't
want to do that no I low carb forget it
you know that yeah those guys can go out
and get and look out look for to
tombstones because they're they're
they're not going to be the survivors uh
the survivors are the ones that take an
active uh role in the management of
their their disease and I should also
point out Eric that we metabolic therapy
does not guarantee cure to cancer
metabolic therapy is a way to manage
your disorder and keep you alive for a
longer period of time with a higher
quality of life if you live to be 95
years old when you were diagnosed at 35
with a terminal cancer and you die from
heart disease at 95 and unic cancer
never came back only then could you
someone would say that that that that
guy was cured Pablo Kelly in the UK was
diagnosed with a gleo blastoma 10 years
ago and he's still alive today it very
funny had he was diagnosed with an
inoperable gleo blastoma and that if he
didn't do standard of care he was not
expect Ed to live more than 9 or 10
months um he chose no radiation no chemo
no steroids nothing um the the tumor
continued to grow slowly he had his
first debulking surgery three years
after his first diagnosed then uh he
went on metabolic therapy again another
three years went by he had another
debulking surgery continues to grow and
then he's had just finished his third
debulking surgery no radiation no chemo
um you know it's funny we were laughing
the other day with Pablo he says yeah
I'm still alive over 10 years now with a
G blastoma and they said it was
inoperable now it's been operated him
three times wasn't but he's still alive
he got married he has two kids um the
the issue here is he cured no he's not
cured is he alive yes he's alive and he
has a fairly good quality of life other
than a few seizures that he manages with
ketogenic diet so um so this is the
situation so is that coincidence that
you had a Goma model and it's seems like
gbms gasta multi fores uh are somewhat
how how would you call it ketor
responsive and how but so you had an
epilepsy and a
Goma model yeah well I had I had I
didn't have epilepsy in it I had mice
that had I I IND I had one two tumors
that arose spontaneously in the brain of
a mouse and they were gly blastomas and
then I produced several by putting
chemical carcinogens into the brain so I
produced a range uh I I produced a range
of gasta models that replicate the
different kinds of cells neoplastic
cells that you would see in a human with
GBM so they're highly invasive meenal
cells and then there are this rapidly
proliferating stem cells so you hear a
lot about stem cell gomas you hear a lot
about stem cells uh whatever the cell is
whether it's a stem cell biology or
whether it's a meenal biology they're
all dependent on fermentation uh for
survival is there a way to so Dr Nez uh
at Harvard was explaining to me just by
emails that some tumors are just very
glucose dependent and and he he is a
surgeon who takes out these fast growing
tumors but knows they're going to come
back um and and so can you test how
responsive a tumor might be with that
you know take a take a biopsy and put it
on a petri dish and I mean
what what what yeah what we found is
that he that he's right um but the tumor
the human gleo blastoma is a they used
to call it they don't use it the term
multiform anymore they just call it a
gleo blastoma uh but the reason why they
had multiform me because it consisted of
so many different types of cells um in
there and you wouldn't know uh which pop
some people have a lot of what we call
meenal cells which are highly invasive
part of the G the GBM and others have a
lot of stem cells which are the most
rapidly part but they don't invade they
just rapidly grow a lot of angiogenesis
a lot of blood vessels inflammation all
this kind of stuff and um uh we parsed
out these different kinds of cells and
we asked some of them are indeed more
glucose than glutamine dependent and the
meenal cells are more glutamine than
glucose dependent so the way you kill
them is you take away you got to Target
both fuel simultaneously then you kill
both kinds of tumor cells doesn't make
any difference what they are they're
going to die because they need the
fermentation fuels to to survive so
that's why you the target both together
while transitioning the body over to
ketones because neither the stem cell
nor the meenal cell can burn fatty acids
or Ketone bodies so we tested we did all
those studies and we know now that what
how to kill these cancer cells is not
that complicated they are driven by a
fermentation metabolism and they can't
switch to fatty acids or ketones
regardless of whether it's a meenal cell
a stem cell regardless of whether it's
bladder cancer colon cancer breast
cancer they're all the same they all are
fermentable it's a fermentation machine
just like warber warberg said once you
understand that then you know how to go
and strategically manage cancer without
toxicity the problem Eric is that is
that I can speak until I'm purple in the
face and when I talk to some of these
oncologists it's like I'm talking to a
plug socket they they just can't seem to
understand what the hell I'm saying and
they don't read the scientific
literature um they're indoctrinated to
think cancer is a genetic disease and
the promise of the immune therapies The
genome projects and all this stuff was
to Precision do Precision medicine
Target the gene kill the tumor cell that
has not materialized because cancer is
not a genetic disease so we still poison
and irradiate people only that was
supposed to disappear when we realized
the new Precision medicine was coming
it's not coming because it's based on
the wrong Theory so once you understand
the theory then you'll be able to manage
cancer effectively without toxicity the
problem is you can't I can't get that
word I publish in good journals I give
podcasts I tell people I've got all
these anecdotal evidence that it works
it does really well and and then people
go to their oncologist and they say oh
no we have to use radiation toxic
poisons and all this other stuff and
we're going to use some CTI
immunotherapy and opdo bismid which is a
vastin that should have been removed
from the market they're still using
drugs that don't work cost a lot of
money and hurt people now what the hell
is wrong with that how could we how
doesn't anybody have a soul don't they
don't they understand going on here you
know I I'll never forget a a uh a
wonderful teacher in my experience was
into and did mismatch bone marrow
transplants which at a at that
time not not many of them were at all
and and you would be watching people be
very sick and and there was
this uh saying or quotation desperate
times you know Merit desperate measure
well so with the ongoing research um um
I'm optimistic about Jeff volik at Ohio
State being funded to do research he had
a paper recently on the feasibility of a
low carb keto diet for I think breast
cancer
uh stage four or metastatic breast
cancer do you think that just the keto
diet itself without the pulse therapy is
going to have the same possibility of
effect or or or is this going to be a
well like the Woman's Health Initiative
study half a billion dollars they study
the wrong diet we don't want to study
the wrong
diet well I I think there are some
people who do in fact respond remarkably
well uh just to metabolic therapy
without drugs um what we think though is
to get uh more people uh to respond I
think you're going to need some pulsing
of the glutamine problem uh to get it uh
there's two several reasons that number
one you can manage the cancer faster uh
you're you're you're going to uh kill
tumor cells uh faster with uh pulse
press pulse um what what we we do and
the the in the world where in fact we
have a big paper that's under review
right now on this whole thing um when
the person is diagnosed and that's
regardless of what cancer they might be
diagnosed with we do a very
comprehensive blood work to see how many
blood parameters and all the panels the
lipid panels the uh nutrient panels the
the micronutrient panel all these
different panels how far are they from
normaly um and and generally we put them
on a low carbohydrate diet
uh for SE it's much easier to jump into
water only fasting if you've been on a
on a very low zerocarb diet for a week
or so then when you jump into water only
fasting it's much less uh traumatic to
the uh to the system and then we start
to see all the blood work starting to
get into the right lanes uh the right
parameters and and then uh we monitor
the blood glucose Ketone index using the
keto Mojo uh meter or whatever whatever
meter you can have like sometimes free
Libra and all these different ways to
measure blood sugar levels and when you
get into a low gki of 2.0 or below
that's when we start coming in with the
pulsing that's when we hit them with the
glutamine targeting drugs now these
drugs uh work so much more powerfully uh
when the patient is in low gki
therapeutic ketosis which is the
biomarker the physiological state of
nutritional ketosis and we're also
realizing that even some of these
poisonous toxic chemicals they're using
on cancer patients uh can work so much
better when the patient is in
nutritional ketosis so we're seeing that
the dosages can be cut in half onethird
of what they used to give the patients
and still now the drug is doing what
it's supposed to do without or minimal
toxicity to the patient even radi
therapy all the different we and then
when we surgery when like for G blastoma
you can shrink these tumors down and
then when the surgeon comes in they can
debulk a much greater part of the tumor
which will allow the patients to live so
much longer uh rather than trying to go
after the tumor when it's at its most
aggressive State shrink it down um make
it indolent then debulk it we we have
all of the tech all of the tools needed
for managing cancer effectively without
toxicity available today as we speak the
problem is most folks just don't know
how to use all the tools they have
they're not aware that this is a
metabolic disorder and not a genetic
disorder and once they realize that
we're going to be able to manage cancer
uh so much more effectively uh without
the trauma and the toxicity and the all
the terrible things that we now
associate with this with this disorder
it's just a matter of time once they
once the people understand this so the
that kind of brings me to a practical
matter in my office with my patients uh
I I won't tell people that there this
guarantees anything you know I I don't
think this guarantees to change your to
a keto diet doesn't guarantee anything
but uh the studies ongoing the idea that
it's a metabolic disease cancerous and
metabolic disease um you know I still
the toxicities aside I understand those
but I will still tell people to do what
your cancer doctor
recommends but what you were just
mentioning is using the diet as an
adjuvant or as an added uh benefit or
something to add to current treatments
and you know and I say this just because
I have to play a little of the politics
myself if I tell someone that they
shouldn't follow what their oncologist
is recommending I it I I'm hearing what
you say though that you may be able to
get away with the similar medicine or
treatment with fewer side effects at
lower doses um and but what I'll kind of
say
is while there are no guarantee
this is something that I'll teach you
how to do it and follow you over time um
and uh I just really hopeful because you
know of all the diseases when Jeff volik
told me that he was going to study
cancer I was like Jeff of all the you
know if you if you did one big study on
Diabetes we could turn the whole medical
community you know but uh he will have
uh a lot of funding well hopefully not
too long hopefully he can crack this
code at Ohio State um you know thank you
so much for your time you know on a
personal note thanks for I think you met
with my dad some years ago and he
finally passed to his early 90s uh but
thank you for all the help that you
you've given us uh and the the the book
cancer is a metabolic disease is a a
must read um how do people find you
today where would you like people to be
directed well um as I all of my research
uh support now comes from private
foundations and
philanthropy um and people make
donations to my research directly
through the university Boston College uh
they just put the can seaf Freeds cancer
research program but also Travis
christopherson's foundation for cancer
metabolic uh approaches he supports a
lot of my research a large amount of it
uh people uh it's a 503 uh kind of uh
Foundation um so so this keeps us going
to keep uh testing with the Press pulse
uh therapy uh dosage timing and
scheduling is the solu will be like
anything once you know how to use the
tools that you have with respect to the
doses timing and scheduling uh we're
going to be able to manage this cancer
quite effectively uh people people who
who want to do this yes Eric it requires
some participation on the part of the
patient they must play they are key
players in the in the ultimate
management of their disorder they are no
longer a bystander they are an active
participant and the more they understand
the scientific Concepts and what we're
doing and why we're doing it the more
likely they will be the ones that
survive really really well uh from this
treatment and this new strategy because
and and one of the things we notice um
when you do metabolic therapy the right
we have many people who have uh diabetes
obesity High blood pressure hypertension
they have a whole range of different
problems besides having cancer uh and
when they start managing their cancer we
see that the diabetes goes away the high
blood pressure goes away the
hypertension goes away a lot of The
Chronic problems that they were
suffering with and they lose weight they
look healthier they feel fit so you're
you're you're you're seeing a whole
range of chronic problems go away with
cancer just maybe there interrelated
just maybe yeah they're they're very
inter and that I don't know is what
people people need to know that though
yeah once they realize that all these
chronic diseases are
interrelated uh they might uh they might
just embrace the whole thing and say
what are we doing how did we get well
you talked to a Cardiologist they only
talk about the art you talked to
pomologist it's just the lung is the
kidney do for the we we've subdivided
the body up so way yeah thank you so
much for your time and I just thank you
for what you've done as a and a teacher
and mentor to so many of us in the low
carb World thanks thank you very much
Eric it was a real pleasure and and
thank you for the
interview bye now
bye if you enjoyed this video be sure to
like subscribe and hit the notification
Bell and check out a adapt life
academy.com